How many of you made it to
the keynote this morning?
Good selection?
All right.
Got some very cool things happening.
We're very excited with the power of
our hardware to give us the potential
to do even more deployments on Mac OS X,
although of course we're always
continuing to support pure
Java deployments with everyone else.
Was everyone here yesterday, pretty much?
Or at least tried to
squeeze in here yesterday?
My name is Ernie Probacher.
I am the product line manager for
WebObjects and development platforms.
It's our pleasure to welcome you to
the second day of the WebObjects track.
It's two down, 16 to go,
for those of you keeping score at home.
And we have some really
exciting stuff for you today.
Just one quick note,
we do want to try and
keep the aisles clear.
There are a number of empty seats here.
I'm sure these are all
real friendly people.
If you're standing in the aisles,
please come and grab a seat.
Or not, please grab some seats
in the overflow section,
because we need to keep the aisles
clear so the fire marshal does
not get very upset at us again.
So, with that I want to turn
the stage over to -- oh,
James.
James Dempsey,
one of our trainer extraordinaires,
and he'll explain to you about
the very cool stuff happening
with WebObjects Builder.
Thank you very much.
Thanks a lot, Ernie.
Good afternoon.
I am James Dempsey.
And let's see how this all works.
Great.
I'm a developer trainer
with Apple Eye Services.
I am much more used to talking
to a room of 17 to 20 developers
with a big whiteboard behind me
and every once in a while asking,
are there any questions?
Today, I may slip up and say,
I don't mean it.
Just wait and hold them until the end,
please.
Because I can't even see your hands,
really.
Actually,
I can see your hands a little bit.
So the first thing I wanted to do is
just find out how many of you attended
Steve Heyman's session yesterday,
the technical overview?
OK, which is most of you.
Terrific.
I don't know if you noticed,
but in that session,
Steve managed to cover just
about every new feature in
Web Objects Builder in 4.5,
which is what my session's about.
I'm just going to tap dance for you.
No.
Actually, it's actually very good.
Steve had a lot of great
stuff in that presentation,
a technical overview that
kind of gave you a very quick,
brief look at how Web Objects works.
What we're going to do today is twofold.
We are going to take a look
at Web Objects Builder.
But Web Objects Builder is a
tool that you use to create
something called components.
And components are really the heart
and soul of a Web Objects application.
So we're going to take
this time in this hour,
in this session,
to go through very specifically and find
out just what's going on in Web Objects.
We're going to go start at a high level,
get down to the nitty gritty.
And then we're going to take
a look at the end at the new
features in Web Objects Builder.
So I probably should have
advanced the slide already.
We're going to talk about components.
We're going to build some components
using Web Objects Builder.
And then finally,
we're going to take a tour
of some of the new features.
Okay,
that's also what you're going to learn.
So in a WebObjects application,
the heart and soul of a
WebObjects application is
this request response loop.
If you don't understand that,
you're just not going to be a
very good WebObjects programmer.
So let's just start from the top and
walk through at a very high level.
We have a client web browser,
we have a web server
running on a machine,
and then you have your
WebObjects application running
typically on another box.
Now, for the web server to
talk to the application,
we provide something called
the WebObjects adapter,
which is a CGI that is going to
just route the requests from the
web server to the application.
So generally things are
going to work like this.
The web browser clicks on
the URL of your application,
in comes a request,
the web server passes it to the adapter,
the adapter passes it
to your application,
your application processes the request,
creates an HTTP response,
stuffs it full of stuff, typically HTML,
and sends it back,
and the user gets a web page.
That's one go-round of
the request-response loop.
All your application does is sit there
and do that over and over and over again.
If in a desktop application,
your application has an event
loop that's just sitting there
waiting for the next event,
keystroke or mouse down event, same here,
we're just listening on a port for that
HTTP request to come flying in so we can
handle it and send back an HTTP response.
So, let's take a,
we'll drop out that infrastructure and
just focus in on the application itself.
Now, another difference between a
WebObjects app and a desktop
app is that in a WebObjects
app we can have multiple users.
Actually, here we have two.
We can scale up to thousands,
millions of users.
Here are represented two users
by two different browsers.
And we need a way to keep track of
different users' stuff essentially.
So,
when a new request comes in from a user,
we create, or the framework creates
a session for that user.
And a session is an object.
You add instance variables to the session
as places to hold the user's stuff.
It might be their shopping basket,
their preferences,
their personalization info.
The request gets routed in, processed,
and a response gets
sent back to the user.
The other user shows up.
This is a very small,
low volume site here.
It gets processed and sent back.
Now, how do we keep track of this?
It happens automatically for you.
Every session has an ID.
That ID is either stuck in a
URL or it's stuck in a cookie.
Your choice.
So now we have kind of the general
infrastructure of what's going
on in a WebObjects application.
We know how the request comes in.
We can keep everybody's stuff
separate using sessions.
But we still don't know
what's really going on,
because sometimes you come to
a presentation and you get all
these arrows flying around,
but you don't know how
does that really work.
That's what we're going
to try to do today.
And what's really interacting with the
user is something called a component.
If there was a movie,
the WebObjects movie,
the component would be
one of the leading roles.
Everything we've seen so far
The only reason all of it exists
is so a component can do its job.
All of that infrastructure is
there to support the component
in interacting with the user.
So components, a little bit important.
Okay, now how does a component
interact with the user?
It does so in three basic steps.
There are three things that a component
always does to interact with the user.
First thing it does is it generates
some HTML out for the user.
And there it goes.
It gets stuffed into
an outgoing response,
I should say,
and the user gets some HTML that
they can interact with.
So the component starts the
interaction with the HTML.
Then the user interacts with that HTML.
In this case we have a login
page and Fred is going to log in,
type in his password, submit it.
It might be hyperlinks,
something you click on.
As soon as you click on
something or submit a form,
it sends a request,
gets routed back to the right session,
and finally back to the same component
that originally started this thing,
that originally sent out the HTML.
So now the component has two
more things that it needs to do.
It started this interaction.
Now it's got to finish it.
The first thing that happens
when that request comes back in,
our second phase, is it pulls any form
values out of the request.
So in this case Fred typed in his name,
the password is the name of his cat,
and what happens is that gets stored,
typically in a variable somewhere.
When the component is
done with this phase,
it's going to start to
interact with the user.
So the component starts the interaction.
Now it's got to finish it.
So in this case,
we're now certain that all of the state
that the user typed in in the browser
is now synchronized on the server side,
which leads us to our
third and final phase.
The last thing that happens
is a method is invoked.
This is the wildcard phase because it's
a method that you are going to write.
It's a standard method,
just a function for you
procedural folks in the audience,
just a standard old
method that's going to,
do whatever you want.
In this case, that method might go check
Fred's username and password.
You could also fetch
things from the database,
validate credit card information,
take whatever the user is looking
at and put it up in their order
so that they can check out later.
You can associate one of these
methods for every item that you
can click on in the web page.
And since it's a method that essentially
gets executed based on a user action,
we have a special name for
these in WebObjects development.
We call them action methods.
And that's it.
That really is the core heart and
soul of WebObjects programming.
That is all there is to it.
The rest of the time you have free.
Go away.
That's it.
No.
There's just a little more.
But honestly, that is what's going on.
A component generates HTML,
lets the user interact with it.
If there are form values,
it pulls them out.
And then it invokes this action method.
There's one missing wrinkle though.
This is one interaction.
How do we move on and interact
with another component?
And the answer is very simple.
That action method has one
particular requirement,
which is it has to return the
next component that's going
to interact with the user.
And there it is.
So that very last line in
the method is going to say,
return some component.
And at that point,
when we end that method,
we no longer care about
that old component.
It's yesterday's news, who cares?
That's the last request that came in.
Now the golden child of the request
response loop is that component,
this new component.
And now it's going to interact with the
user going through that same process,
beginning with generating some HTML.
And this page welcomes Fred.
It's a very,
very-- we could take this app and go
out and get an IPO within six weeks,
I'll become very, very rich and famous.
Doubtful.
OK.
So--
Let's review those again.
Why?
Because that's all that's going on.
Steve Heyman yesterday talked about
a steep WebObjects learning curve.
I always think that
it's steep not because
Any one particular thing in
WebObjects is really hard.
It's just that there's a lot of it.
But if you sit down and kind
of commit these to memory and
what order they happen in,
everything else you learn in WebObjects
on the web integration side is really
just a refinement of these phases,
an addition to these phases,
or some variation on this theme.
So it's a very nice framework,
conceptual model in your mind,
on which you can hang all the
other pieces of information
of WebObjects off of.
So again, they are:
you generate some HTML.
User interacts.
In comes the request.
If there are form values,
the component pulls them out.
And then finally,
invoke some action method.
And that action method is where
you're going to write a lot of code,
your custom processing.
That's kind of the "you write your
code here" part of this whole deal.
And finally,
we have to return the next component
to interact with each user.
So that's the conceptual piece.
Each of these maps to a method that is
sent automatically to your component
so that it knows when to do this stuff.
And those are append to response
is sent to a component to tell it
to add its HTML into this response,
take values from request,
and invoke action.
Now, it's important to note,
you don't send these messages.
They're automatically sent to
your component in the process
of this request response cycle.
However, as you start doing WebObjects
development and start chatting
with WebObjects developers,
they're going to be using these
terms all over the place and say,
"Well, after append to response,
then I'm going to put this header
into the response and blah,
blah, go on and on and on."
It all just stems from this.
One other note is that we have been,
or I have been talking a lot
about this word component.
And we know that the
word component really,
it's a very overloaded word.
In many different venues it
means many different things.
So let me be very specific, very precise.
In WebObjects when I say component,
there's a class in the
framework called Woe Component.
And that is the class that
implements those methods:
Append a response,
take values from request, invoke action.
It's also the class that
implements those methods:
Append a response,
take values from request, invoke action.
It's also the
[Transcript missing]
By convention,
the first component that a user
interacts with is called main,
as we'll see as we build a project.
But of course,
for every page that you want generated,
you typically are going to
create a separate component.
The only thing you need to be concerned
about is they need to be uniquely named.
And so here we have the main component,
and then in our former example,
moving to a component named welcome page.
Now since the request response
loop's really all I got,
we're going to go through
it once again very quickly.
Quick review.
So the user clicks a
URL in their browser.
In comes a request.
A session is created.
A main component is always created.
It is sent to PenderResponse
and so it generates HTML.
The HTML flies down to the browser.
The user fills out the form, submits it.
In comes a request.
A side note, this time around Fred typed
in the wrong password.
We'll see how that's
going to show up later.
All right, the request comes in.
The component's told to take
values from the request.
It pulls out the values,
stores them in a variable,
is then told to invoke an action.
And that action determines--
our custom code determines,
hey, Fred typed in the wrong password.
We don't want to let him
go on to the welcome page.
We want main to have another
shot at interacting with Fred.
Maybe-- A slightly different page
with an error message or one of
those red asterisks turned on to
let Fred know that he screwed up.
And so the convention in WebObjects
is instead of returning a component
at the end of that action method,
we return null.
We say, nope,
you're not getting a new component.
I'm going to re-interact with the user.
And so in that case,
if we return null from
that action method,
the same component
instant gets used again.
It sent a Pender response again and it
starts its interaction with the user.
And now Fred has a slightly
different login page.
Alright, let's build that.
So if we switch to number four.
It's like magic.
Great.
All right,
so we'll start in Project Builder.
Make a new project.
Call this thing.
No assistance.
Java is our language.
And if we look at the
classes in Project Builder,
you'll notice some familiar items.
There's the application
that we had seen before,
the session.
And there's also main.java.
And I described a component,
in this case main, as a class,
as a type of object.
And you'll see that indeed,
main extends woe component.
And it's a very boring
component at the moment.
It does not have any additional
instance variables or methods.
We're going to change that in a moment.
but a component is
more than just a class.
There are two other files that
describe or make up a component.
They're stored in web
components in a .wo directory.
And there's an HTML file.
And that HTML file is a template that
shows what main is going to look like.
And then we know there's a Java file
that defines all the state that we can
store in main and all of its behavior.
And there's a third file
called a bindings file,
which is that connection between
the user interface and the state.
We're going to talk about those and
look at those in a little more detail.
For now, we're just going to open up
main.wo in WebObjectsBuilder,
the other star of our show.
Great.
So, for those of you who are
relatively new to WebObjects,
WebObjects Builder,
the top half is an HTML editor,
a graphical HTML editor.
So we could type in some static stuff.
Please log in.
And of course we can
make it bold and... nah,
we don't want to center it.
Make it larger,
change the font... beautiful.
We don't want to center that either.
And we're going to put in a form.
This bottom row are items
called dynamic elements.
And these are object-oriented
placeholders of where something
dynamic is going to show up.
So username,
[Transcript missing]
and a dynamic submit button.
Okay, we've now built our
award-winning user interface.
And now we're going to have to
worry about where are we going to
put those values when they come in.
This bottom panel is
called the object browser.
And if we notice,
the first column is labeled main.
And in fact,
this column is a graphical representation
of all of the values and all of the
methods that are in the main class.
Now you'll notice that we
have two already there:
application and session.
However, the main class,
there's nothing between
those curly braces.
Every single component is
able to access its session
and application automatically.
It's behavior that's gotten from
the superclass Woe Components.
However,
we do need a place to stick the username.
And we can add and edit that
Java file right from here.
We'll add a key called username.
It'll be a string.
And we only need an
instance variable for that.
And it adds us here.
If we take a look at the source code,
you'll notice that indeed it has added
that instance variable to our source.
And it works in both ways.
So if I type something in manually,
like my other variable that
I need to store the password,
when I head back to WebObjects Builder,
it shows up.
So there's a direct correspondence
between this column and the code
In the component that I'm editing.
Now we need to connect this
text field so that the values
here show up in this variable.
To do that we just drag on
up and every dynamic element
has a bunch of attributes.
Required attributes show up in
red if they're not already bound.
So we're going to make the value
of this text field get stored
in that variable username.
Do the same for password.
And there we go.
So, we're now worried about,
or now we're done with the state storage.
The only thing we need to do
now is get to the point where
I can click on that submit button
and go to that welcome page.
So let's add an action.
We will call it login.
Hey, hey,
We're going to add it.
And notice that it's added
this login method here.
There's a line, everything above the line
you can think of as a value.
Everything below the line you
can think of as an action method.
We're just going to hook that up
to the submit button as its action.
and we're ready to roll.
Let's go take a look at that source and
notice that it has indeed added a method.
We're going to add one line of code.
This line of code automatically creates
and initializes that welcome page.
The next line of code.
We're just going to pass the
username along to the next
page so it can display it.
So set username to our value of username.
So wait a minute, you may be thinking,
where did Welcome Page come from?
And why does it have a
method called setUserName?
Well, at the moment,
there is no such thing
as the Welcome Page.
We're about to create it,
and we've got to make darn sure that
it actually has that method in it.
So let's set about to do that right now.
Web Components: File, New and Project.
We'll call this Welcome Page.
No Assistance in Java.
And then we'll open it
up in WebObjects Builder.
Alrighty, we're going to need a
place to store that.
Username, string.
We're going to generate source for
the instance variable and methods,
accessor methods as well.
We'll add that.
Let's build our user interface.
Welcome.
We're going to add a dynamic
string element and hook that up.
Now let's make all that really big.
We'll center it, change the font,
change the size.
Change the color, great.
View the source,
and it has indeed added that instance
variable and accessor methods.
That's all that we need to do.
So let's build and run.
You'll notice, what did we do, really?
We defined two HTML pages,
some very basic ones.
We added a couple instance variables,
a couple accessor methods,
one of these action methods that's
automatically generated for us,
and we typed in one line of code.
So let's take a look.
Username, Fred, password.
Oh no, our password field is
in a password field.
Not a problem.
One of the very neat things about
WebObjects development is-- let
me minimize that-- is that a
lot of it is not compiled code.
For example,
our HTML template is not compiled.
So we can come into WebObjects Builder,
select something, and inspect it.
And a text field, well,
an inspector has all of the attributes
that you have set or not set,
and all of the bindings.
We can switch to a static inspector,
and in this case, turn our text field
into a password field.
And let's say we want to
change the Submit button so
that its label says Log In.
Well, in 4.5,
we can double click on an item
to have the inspector show up.
And we'll change the value.
to login.
We can type in a literal value
instead of having it go to get
some method or some variable.
I would just save our change,
minimize main, and when I refresh,
it automatically updates,
which is pretty nifty.
Password.
And we're welcoming Fred.
Now, let's just take a moment.
To go through blah blah blah
that request response loop.
So, as soon as I click this return
button and that URL comes in,
we make a new session, main is created,
main is sent to Pender Response,
it generates its HTML.
We put in a value, login.
As soon as we hit login,
that request comes in.
The username and password are
pulled out of the incoming request.
Our login method is executed.
It creates a welcome page,
passes the name along,
and returns it in that final phase.
We're now done with main,
and the welcome page starts its
interaction by generating its HTML,
and we get a dynamic page.
Any questions?
Let's go back to main.
Steve showed you this yesterday,
but some of you might not have been here.
We can switch from a nice
GUI editor to raw text mode.
The HTML is just plain stock HTML with
the addition of a WebObject tag.
One additional tag that says, "Hey,
something dynamic is going to go here."
WebObjects Builder:
A WebObject tag is one
attribute which is a name,
a unique name, and that name maps to an
entry in this second file,
this bindings file, where we find out,
hey, that WebObject tag,
what kind of thing is it?
Is it a form?
Is it a dynamic submit button?
And also, all of those attributes that
you saw in the inspector,
they are all present here,
so that that dynamic element knows
where to get its information or
where to put information at right.
So, that's the runtime.
Okay, done with the demo.
Let's go back to the slides.
If you understand that,
if going through those three phases
by now bores the dickens out of you,
then that's good.
That means you're well on your
way to becoming an excellent
WebObjects programmer because
that's what's going on.
That's pretty much it.
There's additional stuff
that hangs off of that,
but that's the whole
shebang for the web side.
The next session is going to be
talking about the database side.
So if it's in your head, beautiful.
However, you might be saying, well,
first of all, let's talk about the stuff
we didn't have to do.
We didn't have to do anything,
if you noticed, to get all that to work.
We could take what we just built,
if we wanted to,
deploy it on a whole bunch of
16 processor Solaris boxes,
and let millions of people show
up and type in their name and
have a page come back that says,
"Welcome."
It wouldn't be terribly exciting,
but we could.
We didn't have to do a whole lot.
We didn't have to touch the request.
We didn't have to touch the response.
We didn't have to parse the form values.
All of that just happened for
us because that's the stuff that
you have to do every single time.
That's the stuff that,
who wants to be bothered?
So WebObjects takes care of that
so you can write the cool stuff,
the logic, the application logic,
the business logic that makes your
WebObjects application useful,
unlike the application I just wrote,
and also gives value to
whoever's going to be using it.
However,
we're going to dig one layer deeper and
talk about what's really going on here.
How does it do all that?
Well, I showed you those two other files.
We know there's a Java file
that defines the object,
but there are these two other files:
an HTML file and a WAD file,
as it's called.
I always find that just
a weird word to say,
"Wad file." Everybody say it.
WAD file.
Say it loud.
Say it louder.
WAD file.
Even louder.
[Transcript missing]
So when we're generating
HTML and append to response,
what's going on?
Well, the component has this template.
And when the component is told, hey,
append to the response, well,
the component says, well,
I don't know what to do.
Hey, template, append to the response.
And it goes through,
and the static stuff gets
popped into the response.
Then the woe string is told, hey,
append your stuff to the response.
And the woe string is like, well,
what am I?
Oh, I've got to figure out what
I'm going to put in here,
I guess.
And it does its thing.
And then there's more static
stuff that just gets thrown
in because it's not dynamic.
Then the hyperlink is told
to append to the response,
and it has to figure out
what URL it's going to use,
and so on down the page.
So every dynamic element gets
its shot at appending its little
chunk of HTML into the response.
Let me go back one.
Just a note, each of these items,
when it builds this nice little template,
has a unique element ID.
So whenever a hyperlink, for example,
generates the URL that
you're going to click on,
that element ID is in there.
So it can tell, oh,
I was the thing that was clicked on.
And whenever a text field is generated,
it has a little name attribute
that is the element ID.
So it can look into the request and say,
oh, that's my value.
No real magic going on.
Appender response,
when it's sent to a woe string, it says,
oh, OK.
Well, I belong to a component,
and a dynamic element without
a component is useless,
utterly useless.
They work together.
So when a woe string is
sent to appender response,
it consults its bindings, says, oh,
my value is hooked up to username.
Let me ask my component,
what's the value for username?
And the component gives back the answer.
In this case, Fred, the woe string goes,
oh,
now I know what to generate in the HTML.
That happens for every
single item in the template.
If there were 18 bindings,
it would go and ask 18 different times.
For taking values from the request,
when the component is
asked to take values,
it just turns to its template of
dynamic elements and asks them
to take values from the request.
Of course,
only in this case the text fields
are going to find something there.
So what's going on?
Well, we have our components.
To start off with,
the username and password have no value.
And in comes a request.
Books in,
takes that value Fred out of the request,
consults its bindings, "Oh,
my value's hooked up to username.
I'm going to tell my component, 'Hey,
take this value Fred for that
key username and store it
there.'" And so it happens.
And that happens for every form value.
That's all that's going on.
And then finally, invoke action.
In this case,
we know the submit button was clicked.
How does that work?
Well, the request comes in.
We have a component with
some action methods defined,
in this case login.
It reads in that URL,
it's what flew by real quick.
Let's do that again, this is fast.
consults that, says, "Oh,
my action's hooked up to login.
I'll send my component login." And then
the component executes that method.
Let's execute it again.
Do you know how long
that takes in PowerPoint?
That's a real pain to do.
Do it one more time.
I just love that.
That's what's going on in WebObjects.
That's it, actually.
There's a couple other
details I'm leaving out,
but this is the absolute core.
The absolute core of what's going
on in every WebObjects application.
If you have this firm in your head,
You're pretty much good to go.
You're on the right track.
You can go downstairs to the lab
if you're brand new to WebObjects
and start building the little
pup that I just started building.
Now, two points that I want to make,
and those two points are this.
It's kind of interesting that we can
get to a dynamic element can get to
that information in the component,
but we have this thing called a session.
And it's kind of odd that if
main needs the username and the
welcome page needs the username,
that we have to write all this
code to pass it from page to page.
What if like eight components
needed to get to the username?
Well, we might instead stick
it up in the session.
And every component
can get to its session,
and every component,
and then in the session we could
store it in one place for each user.
Now how would we hook that up?
Well,
what's very nice is we have something
in WebObjects called a key path.
If you recall before, right,
if value was hooked up to username,
it would ask its component, hey,
what's your username?
And it would get back a value.
Well, we have this dot separated path,
and so when this woe string
needs to find its value,
it asks its component, hey,
what's your session?
What's your value for session?
Then it asks the object
that gets passed back,
hey, what's your value for username?
It gets back the value, and voila.
Kind of nifty.
Those paths always start
with the component,
however.
But let's go one step further,
because a username is not a very
useful piece of information.
A username, actually, most websites,
my username is like JD17234,
because all the good ones were taken.
Does anybody have a good, nobody does.
There's like one James and that's it.
Welcome JD 1472.
Here are the last five
purchases from our site.
We want to group things together.
So in the database I might have
a row that has the username,
maybe their password,
maybe it's encrypted, a first name,
a last name, an email address,
maybe a relationship to
the last five purchases,
favorite color, all that good stuff.
Using the database chunk
that's in the next section,
we can take that row in the database,
turn it into,
in this case maybe a customer object,
and store a customer in the session.
And a customer is going to
have different properties.
In this case we're going to
use first name as the example.
And to hook this up,
we're going to use the
Just a longer key path.
Just kind of whisper down the chain.
This is seven degrees of Kevin Bacon,
is what I call this.
Because it's the same exact thing.
It's like, I'm at the component,
what key path do I need to
get to the information I need?
And this time around,
it's just going to ask, hey, component,
what's your session?
Hey, what's your customer?
What's your first name?
And then get back the answer.
This can be arbitrarily long.
Like I've seen them eight, nine,
they just go on forever.
The important thing to realize,
two points, is that each of those things,
all the codes you wrote,
you put in an instance variable.
That's all you put in,
was one instance variable
to hold the next object.
You don't have any,
all this accessor code where
you have to pull the customer
name into the component.
And the other neat thing is that
this path is not compiled at all.
It's in that binding.
file and we saw that if I make a change,
that I just refresh.
I don't have to restart the app,
let alone recompile it.
And so if I want that string
to hook up to last name,
I just change that to
session.customer.lastname,
refresh the page,
and then I can go back to the page.
And suddenly I've made a major UI change
with very little work on my part.
Very little risk as a developer.
And now I want to say any questions,
but I'm not going to.
I think I just did.
Oh, I'm hitting the back button.
How scary.
There we go.
We're going to do a demo.
What we're going to do is twofold.
We're going to implement a little
password checking logic and have
an error message pop up if the
person types in the wrong password.
Then when we're done that,
get that working,
we're actually going to hit the
database based on the username,
fetch the right customer object,
stick it in the session,
and on the next page, the welcome page,
reach into the session and pull down
their first and last name and display it.
Let's type in an error message.
First let's make it nice and big.
You have...
That is not recommended
Apple UI guidelines.
However,
haven't you all wanted to put that at one
point or another somewhere in your app?
You can applaud.
I don't mind.
I got extra time.
Okay.
And then we need, this is, oh,
what did I just do?
How about I explain what
I'm doing in the demo?
That might be nice.
That would be a good thing.
I'm adding something
called a conditional.
A conditional is an if
statement in your HTML.
And it needs a Boolean to determine
whether to show or hide what's in there.
Well, we don't want everybody
getting this rude message,
so we're going to add a Boolean.
We'll call it a login error.
We type Boolean.
We only need an instance variable.
And we just wire that
up to the conditional.
will save.
That's all we need to do to our UI.
Let's go to the source.
We actually have to write a
little conditional logic here.
So, matter of fact,
I have an extra moment.
It's actually, where am I?
There it is.
No, that's not what I want.
There are many,
many wonderful preferences
in Project Builder Woe.
Okay, let's just bump up that size.
Set it.
The first thing we're going to
do is apply the syntax coloring.
Okay, so here we go.
Easier to see the code.
So the first thing we're going to
do is the next page by default,
if they don't type in the wrong password,
we don't want to let them see our
super secure welcome page with
all that sensitive information.
So we're just going to
return null by default.
And then our elaborate
password checking scheme,
if the password they typed in
equals the string password.
[Transcript missing]
The actual new page.
And we're going to send that
information along to the next page,
the user's name.
Else, if they screwed up and
typed in the wrong password,
login error,
we're going to set that to true.
We'll build this.
Notice that what we're doing
is taking some conditional
action in that action method,
because you don't have to return
one component all the time.
It's your code.
You can return whatever
the heck you want.
Let's go to OmniWeb.
Let's log in.
Fred will log in.
He won't type in the right password.
and now he feels really terrible
because he's an idiot okay so
fred if there any friends in the
audience i very much apologize i
You're not an idiot.
This is a hypothetical, Fred.
And if he types in the
correct password...
Login.
There we go.
Wonderful.
Next step, hitting the database.
So, let's actually minimize
some of these windows.
Now we need to be able
to hook up to a database.
All will be explained
in the next session,
but for now, none will be explained.
We add something called a model file.
which is built with EOModeler,
the topic of the next session.
And we're going to build,
or we're going to add a customer.java
file which is generated from EOModeler,
which is covered in the next section.
So if you're curious,
go to the next section.
All right, web components, resources,
put everything in the right place,
that's very good.
Now, all that we're going to do is this.
We're going to first...
Change this.
We no longer need the username here.
Very nice new feature in
WebObjects Builder now.
In addition to adding
stuff to your source code,
you can actually delete it.
So we're going to delete the username.
It also is going to check to make sure
that these bindings that you have set,
do you want to unbind them or ignore it?
Well, we're going to unbind.
So it keeps you from having
errors due to binding.
We'll add a second string.
Now another nifty thing in WebObjects
Builder 4.5 is when I click on
an item in the first column,
the second column is now a
representation of that particular class.
And actually if I have source code to it,
I can even add stuff.
So I can add stuff to the session.
It's a contextual menu.
I'll add a key to the session.
I'll call it customer of type customer.
Let's have methods to
get and set as well,
which adds a customer
from that customer class.
It knows all the stuff
that's in a customer,
so we can display the first and last
name of a customer just like that.
Now let's, actually we'll minimize that.
Who turned on window shading?
I had the other behavior set.
Okay.
Now let's edit this pup.
Login.
So when they login, we want to fetch.
There is a, actually,
we're going to fetch a customer.
We'll call it customer
as our local variable.
And in Java, we're going to typecast what
comes back as a customer.
We are going to use an EOUtility,
which is a very quick one line
way to fetch in WebObjects.
EOUtilities can't talk one
thing and type another thing.
We're going to go ask for the
object matching key and value.
In WebObjects, in your application,
every session by default
has this place where you can
edit and fetch objects from the
database called an editing context.
So we're going to use
that to perform our fetch.
The thing that we're going to be fetching
Our customers are going to be looking
up customers based on their username.
The actual thing that we're
going to look up on is what
the user typed in for username.
That line is going to
go get us a customer.
Do I need it?
Oh, you're right.
Thank you, Mr.
Compiler.
No, because that's how I code.
I let the compiler deal with
those because it's good at it.
Better than I am, apparently.
So here we go.
Customer.
And now all we're going to do
is check if the customer... No,
that's not what we're going to do.
If the password that they typed in
equals the customer's password...
Then we're not going
to pass anything along.
We're just going to stick that
customer up in the session.
So we'll access our session and tell
it to set its customer to customer.
So in addition of one, two,
three lines of code, let's see how this
This seed of a personalization
engine is working.
So,
let's go back to our good friend Fred.
He'll type in the wrong password.
We don't let Fred in.
He types in "whiskers,"
his correct password.
And voila,
we have our personalization engine.
Let's get another session going.
Brand new session.
This time it will be JD12345
Let's type in the wrong password.
Voila.
And so we have two different sessions,
two different customer objects
fetched from the database.
And we didn't do a whole heck of a lot,
did we?
I built that in, I don't know,
10 minutes, 15 minutes.
Now is that production
code that I wrote there?
No, we might want to check to
make sure that we actually got
something back from the database.
We might have encrypted passwords.
Stop by the security session
later this week to find out more
about security and login issues
with WebObjects or techniques.
However, boy,
if you're going into a client,
this is a nice prototype, right?
You whip up very quickly,
so that's pretty groovy.
Again, we did
A fair share of stuff here in
a very short amount of time.
And let's switch to the slides actually.
We did it all without
doing all too much work.
We added a couple instance variables,
added a couple accessor methods,
we added one action method that
took some conditional action and
did a little bit of checking.
We set some things, we got some things,
and we did some mysterious database
stuff which will be explained later.
With that, what I'd like to do is,
now you have a good idea of
what the heck is a component,
how does it interact
with a dynamic element,
or its dynamic elements,
how do these three files, this HTML file,
this WAD file, this Java file,
how do they interact,
what's their relationship,
how do they interact at runtime,
and how do they interact with each other?
Where do I plug in my code?
What are the things
I have to worry about?
What don't I have to worry about?
So at this time I'd like to
bring up Tom Naughton from
the WebObjects Builder team,
who's going to talk a little
bit about new features in 4.5.
Thanks.
I think my leg has gone to sleep,
so if I fall over, don't mind me.
Anyway, I'm going to talk a little
bit about the new features.
The goals in 4.0, first of all,
how many people have
used the new 4.5 builder?
[Transcript missing]
Syntax coloring.
Previous versions didn't
have syntax coloring,
but we didn't just want to
add it to make it pretty.
We wanted to actually make it useful.
So it's actually kind of
smart syntax coloring.
It'll show lots of times when
people edit HTML by hand,
they'll introduce errors,
like mismatched tags and such.
So the syntax coloring
actually shows you the errors.
Whenever the tokenizer runs into
something that it doesn't like to parse,
it'll make that token red.
And if you, let's see,
add an extra closing tag that
doesn't match an open tag,
it'll draw that in red.
So basically you can
just look at your page,
you can see that tags are unbalanced,
and you can easily fix the errors.
Improved Binding User Interface.
Let's see,
people liked the way you can just drag
connect your bindings in the builder,
but in previous versions
you'd have to drag up,
select the element,
and then go over to the inspector
and actually click which
binding you want to bind to.
So it was a little cumbersome.
We made it, we changed it so it's,
you can do all that in one gesture.
You just drag up, a menu pops down,
you choose the binding
you want to connect to,
and it's all very fluid.
Improve font tag support.
The built-in font panel that you get
from the app kit is real convenient
for picking one font but for HTML you
usually want to specify a list
of fonts so that the browser can
use a different font if it doesn't
have the one that you specified.
So we added a font panel
custom-made for HTML.
It saves all of your font preferences so
that you can use them again and again.
Display options.
Let's see, okay, one important thing we
added was a preview mode.
We're always torn between do we want
to make the builder what you see is
what you get or do we want to add
lots of convenient editing widgets.
And by adding the preview mode
we can actually do it both ways.
If you choose preview mode the builder
makes all of its rendering decisions
in favor of making it look just
like it would look in the browser.
If you choose editing mode it
shows you all of your bindings,
it shows all the web objects
and the binding values on them.
There are lots of
convenient editing features.
You can also turn on the preview mode.
You can also add options and preferences
so that it will show things that are
otherwise hidden such as HTML comments
or JavaScript so that you can get
a better view of what your page
actually looks like and then switch
to preview mode and it will again
show like it looks in the browser.
And we also added an API editor.
We've had API files in previous
versions of the builder.
It basically exports which bindings
are available for nested components.
But previous versions of the
builder didn't use it very well.
You had to edit the file by hand and
users didn't adopt them very well.
So we actually added some UI to
make it easy to make the API files.
And you can also add your own
binding validation rules just like
the built-in validation rules.
So it makes it a lot easier
to set up those files.
Anyway, I guess James has a demo now.
He's going to show some
of the new features.
Alright, we're up to the... whoop,
do I need to click?
Oh yes, because I have to put up the
very important demo slide.
Okay, we got the two minute warning,
so let's fly on through this.
So let's take a look at main again.
And I'm just going to kind of
walk through some of the features
that Tom had talked about.
The first one being that
we can delete bindings.
So, username is hooked up.
We'll delete that.
We'll also unbind.
All well and good, but then I say, "Oh,
I didn't mean to do that.
I got undo." And this undo is not
only going to re-hook up everything
correctly in the bindings file,
but it's also going to put that thing
back in my code in Project Builder.
So, it's aware WebObjects Builder
is editing three files at once.
This undo is actually
keeping those all up to date.
Very nice new feature,
because I always make mistakes.
I don't know about you all.
Every once in a while.
Contextual menus.
We have them everywhere.
Actually,
you'll see them as they come up.
We're a little pressed for time.
Let's add a new table,
take a look at the table panel.
We open it up.
We get to pick how many
columns and rows we want,
border, etc.
My favorite,
most handy thing is that your
second row can be automatically
wrapped in a repetition,
so you don't have to
select it and add one,
because you're always
repeating lists of things.
And your first row can be
automatically header cells.
We're going to add just a plain 2x2,
and let's move our form elements
in there to neaten things up a bit.
Where am I?
Help!
Okay.
We'll just re-hook that up.
See, even when you totally screw up,
it's even easier in
WebObjects Builder 4.5.
I'm just demoing somebody
screwing up in WebObjects Builder
4.5 and quickly recovering.
So there we go.
Well, open the inspector.
We no longer have to switch
to some sort of--well,
first, this is the path view.
And it's very nice.
I want to select the table.
Bam, I've selected the table.
Very easy.
To edit the table,
I don't have to go to some
structure editing mode.
I just click in the inspector,
add a new row.
Let's merge these cells together.
Let's move the login panel
or the login button in there.
That's wonderful new
stuff with the table view.
On the palette,
You have, well, Steve Hammond's leftover
palettes from yesterday,
but also JavaScript palettes
that ship with the product,
including image flyovers.
We'll just throw one in there.
Definitely check out these
JavaScript reusable components.
They're very useful.
And there's also validation.
So you'll notice as
soon as I drag that in,
this button came to life and told me
that something screwed up on my page.
I have validation.
I have some required bindings of this
image flyover that I have not hooked up.
The other nifty thing is
if I click on the error,
it automatically selects the
item that's having the problem.
So if you have 18
hyperlinks on your page,
you can jump right to the right one.
So we're going to fix our validation
problems by deleting that.
If the feature don't work, cut it.
Let's close up the palette.
Let's jump over and let's
look at this HTML editing.
Nicest thing, well two things.
One is, say we screw up our HTML somehow.
Notice that this closing tag
has turned red to indicate
that something has fouled up.
And so it's doing error checking
that's very obvious in color.
We also have a very nice feature.
If I triple click, it'll select all the
way to the matching tag.
So we double or triple click this table,
it'll select to the other
end of the table tag.
Even niftier, if I triple click and drag,
it'll select ever enclosing tags all
the way up the page and all the way
back to where I originally clicked.
Here's a nifty feature.
Some folks like to put
comments in their WAD files.
WebObjects Builder 4.0 is notorious for,
when you go into graphical mode,
getting rid of your comments.
Well, we can type in some comments,
switch back, switch back.
They're still there.
That's a very good thing.
You can applaud that one.
This is a golf game.
Good.
Thank you.
Some other nifty things.
In the inspector, say we want somebody to
type in a date into a field,
we can put date formatters.
That's always been there.
But you had to remember
these formatting strings.
Well, now there's a pop-up of common
formatting strings and examples for
date formatting and number formatting.
Makes life easier.
That also is true of many types,
like Boolean types.
If you're picking an action,
you get a list of all the actions in your
component to choose from without having
to remember or type them in yourself.
So those pop-ups are very nifty.
And, oh, one of my favorites.
It's always kind of hard,
or it's always been hard if
you wanted to wrap a repetition
around two rows for some reason.
Well,
there are a lot of these new display
[Transcript missing]
is very, very easy.
Now you say, well,
that's great because I want to
see how my table's laid out,
but this don't look like a table no more.
Well, that's why preview mode was added.
So it's going to look like rendered HTML,
whereas you can have all of
your nice editing widgets.
[Transcript missing]
And to thank this man gave up a
lucrative career as a stand-up comedian
just to become a WebObjects trainer.
Thank you, James.
We're going to start the Q&A now,
so we invite anyone in the overflow
room who wants to come and ask
questions to come up and join us.
Again, please try and use the microphones
in the aisles so that people getting
interpretation and recordings will
be able to hear them appropriately.
I also have the other presenters up here,
if we could, to help answer questions.
Thank you very much.
I also want to introduce Ben Haller
from the WebObjects Engineering team,
who will be joining us as well.
Ben Haller: Tom, the QA is left.
Oh, do you want to mention
the roadmap real quick?
Sure, let me answer that.
All right, so roadmap.
Next section is on the database chunk.
Two sessions from now is deployment.
You've built your app,
now what do you do with it?
It covers the new deployment
architecture in 4.5.
Later this week,
integrating client-side technologies,
i.e.
JavaScript and all sorts
of other nice stuff,
Smile, QuickTime, Flash.
Reusable components.
Now we know what a component is,
let's make them so that we
build them once and reuse
them in project after project.
And I also did mention that security one,
which didn't fit on this slide.
For more info,
there's that thing downstairs,
the big lab.
Check it out.
[Transcript missing]